nixos/doc: improve install instructions (#175128)
NixOS/nixpkgs: nixos/doc/manual/installation/installing.chapter.md

# Installing NixOS {#sec-installation}

## Booting from the Install drive {#sec-installation-booting}

To begin the installation, you have to boot your computer from the install drive.

1.   Assuming your computer is still running, plug in the install drive

> and restart your computer.

Reviewer: So from power-off I don't need to plug in the install drive?

(Not sure how to rephrase this, but it seems like there's a disconnect between the sentences.)

2.   Most computers will allow to select a drive to temporary boot from by
pressing a special key, usually <kbd>F12</kbd>, but sometimes <kbd>Esc</kbd>

> or another function key. Refer to the screen or your computer's documentation.

Reviewer: This is not a discrete step, merge down with the next step.

Author: i think finding the right key to press and actually pressing it can be seen as two different tasks. it's already a lot of text for these steps. merging them would be a lot of text

Reviewer: Would a `::: {.note}` callout or similar construct help here?

The way I see it, the step is to boot the installation media, a *tip* or *note* can add additional details.

Author: very good suggestion! i'll add that

3.   Press <kbd>F12</kbd> (or the appropriate key) and select the install drive,
usually "USB-HDD" or something containing the word "USB", but the wording may vary.
If your computer support BIOS and UEFI boot, choose the UEFI option.

> If you choose the incorrect drive, your computer will likely continue to boot
> as normal. Just restart your computer and pick a different drive in that menu.

Reviewer: *Just*?

```suggestion
If you choose the incorrect drive, your computer will likely continue to boot
as normal. In that case restart your computer and pick a different drive in that menu.
```

*Just* is almost always a poor choice when connecting sentences or ideas in docs, IMO. Here it could be understood as passing a judgement that "it's simple, *just* pick the right thing". A more neutral formulation feels better IMO.

Author: yes, it can be very frustrating when you do that for the first time and it does not work as you want

4.   Shortly after selecting the appropriate boot drive, you should be presented
with a menu with different Installer options. Leave the default and wait
(or press <kbd>Enter</kbd> to speed up).

5.   The graphical images will start the desktop environment and the graphical

> installer, which can take some time. The minimal images will just have
> a command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installer, which can take some time. The minimal images will boot to
a command line.
```

The usage of *just* here is fine, but I'm proposing this alternate formulation that, I think, better describes what happens.

Author: good suggestion!

     your public IP address.
     :::

3.   Then you can select the keyboard layout. The default keyboard model should
     work well with most desktop keyboards. If you have a special keyboard or
     notebook, your model might be in the list. Select the language you are most
     comfortable typing in.

     ::: {.tip}
     There are special keyboard layouts that are optimized to be ergonomic like
     [NEO](https://www.neo-layout.org/),
     [Dvorak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dvorak_keyboard_layout) and
     [Colemak](https://colemak.com/), in opposition to the classic QWERTY layout
     which comes from typewriters and has not changed much since 1873.
     You might want to check them out.
     :::

4.   On the "Users" screen, you have to type in your name, login name and
     password. You can also enable an option to automatically login to the
     desktop.

5.   Then you have the option to choose a desktop environment. If you want to
     create a custom setup with a window manager, you can select "No desktop".

     ::: {.tip}
     If you don't have a favorite desktop and don't know which to choose, you

>      can stick to either GNOME or Plasma. They are quiet different from their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     can stick to either GNOME or Plasma. They are quite different from their
```

Quiet is silent.

```suggestion
     can stick to either GNOME or Plasma. They are quite different in their
```

I don't think "different from their design" is proper english, but I'm also an english-as-a-second-language person...

Author: right. "in their design" sounds more correct

i just use "They have a quite different design" now

     design, so you should be able to choose which one you like better.
     They are both popular choices and well tested on NixOS.
     :::

6.   You have the option to allow unfree software in the next screen.

7.   The easiest setting in the "Partitioning" screen is "Erase disk", which will

>      delete all data from the selected disk and installs the system on it.

Reviewer: Either

```suggestion
     delete all data from the selected disk, and installs the system on it.
```

or

```suggestion
     delete all data from the selected disk and install the system on it.
```

It depends though on how the sentence is split I guess? I assume the difference is between "delete and install" or "delete, then installs".

# Installing NixOS {#sec-installation}

> ## Booting from the Install drive {#sec-installation-booting}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Booting from the install medium {#sec-installation-booting}
```

To begin the installation, you have to boot your computer from the install drive.

1.   Plug in the install drive. When your computer is still running, restart it,
     otherwise start it.

2.   Most computers will allow to select a drive to temporary boot from by
     pressing a special key, usually <kbd>F12</kbd>, but sometimes
     <kbd>Esc</kbd> or another function key. Refer to the screen or search
     online for your computers brand, model followed by "boot from usb".

3.   Press <kbd>F12</kbd> (or the appropriate key) and select the install drive,
     usually called "USB-HDD" or something containing the word "USB", but the
     wording may vary. If your computer support BIOS and UEFI boot, choose the
     UEFI option. If you choose the incorrect drive, your computer will likely
     continue to boot as normal. In that case restart your computer and pick

>      a different drive in that menu.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     a different drive in the menu.
```

4.   Shortly after selecting the appropriate boot drive, you should be

>      presented with a menu with different Installer options. Leave the default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     presented with a menu with different installer options. Leave the default
```

     and wait (or press <kbd>Enter</kbd> to speed up).

> 5.   The graphical images will start the desktop environment and the graphical

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5.   The graphical images will start their corresponding desktop environment and the graphical
```

To begin the installation, you have to boot your computer from the install drive.

1.   Plug in the install drive. Then turn on or restart your computer.

2.   Open the boot menu by pressing the appropriate key, which is usually shown
     on the display on early boot.
     Select the USB flash drive (the option usually contains the word "USB").
     If you choose the incorrect drive, your computer will likely continue to
     boot as normal. In that case restart your computer and pick a
     different drive.

     ::: {.note}
     The key to open the boot menu is different across computer brands and even
     models. It can be <kbd>F12</kbd>, but also <kbd>F1</kbd>,
     <kbd>F9</kbd>, <kbd>F10</kbd>, <kbd>Enter</kbd>, <kbd>Del</kbd>,
     <kbd>Esc</kbd> or another function key. If you are unsure and don't see
     it on the early boot screen, you can search online for your computers
     brand, model followed by "boot from usb".
     The computer might not even have that feature, so you have to go into the
     BIOS/UEFI settings to change the boot order. Again, search online for
     details about your specific computer model.

>      For Apple computers with Intel processor press and hold the <kbd>⌥</kbd>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     For Apple computers with Intel processors press and hold the <kbd>⌥</kbd>
```

     (Option or Alt) key until you see the boot menu. On Apple silicon press
     and hold the power button.
     :::

     ::: {.note}
     If your computer supports both BIOS and UEFI boot, choose the UEFI option.
     :::

     ::: {.note}
     If you use a CD for the installation, the computer will probably boot from
     it automatically. If not, choose the option containing the word "CD" from
     the boot menu.
     :::

3.   Shortly after selecting the appropriate boot drive, you should be
     presented with a menu with different installer options. Leave the default
     and wait (or press <kbd>Enter</kbd> to speed up).

4.   The graphical images will start their corresponding desktop environment
     and the graphical installer, which can take some time. The minimal images
     will boot to a command line. You have to follow the instructions in
     [](#sec-installation-manual) there.

## Graphical Installation {#sec-installation-graphical}

The graphical installer is recommended for desktop users and will guide you
through the installation.

1.   In the "Welcome" screen, you can select the language of the Installer and
     the installed system.

     ::: {.tip}

>      Leaving the language as "American English" will help to be able to copy
>      and paste error messages in a search engine or issue report.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     Leaving the language as "American English" will make it easier to search for
     error messages in a search engine or to report an issue.
```

     :::

2.   Next you should choose your location to have the timezone set correctly.
     You can actually click on the map!

     ::: {.note}
     The installer will use an online service to guess your location based on
     your public IP address.
     :::

3.   Then you can select the keyboard layout. The default keyboard model should
     work well with most desktop keyboards. If you have a special keyboard or
     notebook, your model might be in the list. Select the language you are most
     comfortable typing in.

4.   On the "Users" screen, you have to type in your display name, login name
     and password. You can also enable an option to automatically login to the
     desktop.

5.   Then you have the option to choose a desktop environment. If you want to
     create a custom setup with a window manager, you can select "No desktop".

     ::: {.tip}
     If you don't have a favorite desktop and don't know which one to choose,
     you can stick to either GNOME or Plasma. They have a quite different

>      design, so you should be able to choose which one you like better.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     design, so you should choose whichever you like better.
```

     They are both popular choices and well tested on NixOS.
     :::

6.   You have the option to allow unfree software in the next screen.

7.   The easiest option in the "Partitioning" screen is "Erase disk", which will
     delete all data from the selected disk and install the system on it.
     Also select "Swap (with Hibernation)" in the dropdown below it.
     You have the option to encrypt the whole disk with LUKS.

     ::: {.note}
     At the top left you see if the Installer was booted with BIOS or UEFI. If
     you know your system supports UEFI and it shows "BIOS", reboot with the
     correct option.
     :::

     ::: {.warning}
     Make sure you have selected the correct disk at the top and that no
     valuable data is still on the disk! It will be deleted when
     formatting the disk.
     :::

8.   Check the choices you made in the "Summary" and click "Install".

     ::: {.note}
     The installation takes about 15 minutes. The time varies based on the
     selected desktop environment, internet connection speed and disk write speed.
     :::

> 9.  When the install is complete, reboot into your new system!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
9.  When the install is complete, remove the USB flash drive and reboot into your new system!
```

Author: that works, thanks

i left it out because it should not not boot from usb again, but it is more elegant to close with this

# Installing NixOS {#sec-installation}

## Booting from the install medium {#sec-installation-booting}

To begin the installation, you have to boot your computer from the install drive.

1.   Plug in the install drive. Then turn on or restart your computer.

> 2.   Press <kbd>F12</kbd> (or the appropriate key) to open the boot menu.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2.   Open the boot menu by pressing the appropriate key that's shown on your monitor on early boot. If no key is displayed consult your motherboard or system handbook.
```
That key differs widely across many motherboard and laptop manufactures. It could also be F1, F9, F10, Enter or Del.

Probably needs to be deduped with the warning.

Author: i had there first to look it up in the computers documentation, but i think it's easier to look it up online. most people probably don't find these documentations

i use your suggestion for the first sentence

     Select the USB flash drive (the option usually contains the word "USB").

>      If you choose the incorrect drive, your computer will likely continue to
>      boot as normal. In that case restart your compute and pick a different drive.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     If you choose the incorrect drive, your computer will either continue to
     boot as normal or abort with no OS found. In both cases restart your compute and pick a different drive.
```

Reviewer: In addition to suggestions, *your comput* → *your compute**r***.

Author: i think that is a rare case and does not add much useful information. the "likely" says that other things can happen, but they are not relevant to mention here

     ::: {.note}
     The key to open the boot menu is different across computer brands and even

>      models. It is usually <kbd>F12</kbd>, but sometimes <kbd>Esc</kbd> or
>      another function key. If you are unsure, look at the POST screen that is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     models. It can be <kbd>F12</kbd>, but also <kbd>Esc</kbd>, <kbd>Enter</kbd> or
     another function key. If you are unsure, look at the POST screen that is
```

Author: thanks. i also added all keys you mentioned above

     shown first when the computer is started. You can also search online for
     your computers brand, model followed by "boot from usb".
     The computer might not even have that feature, so you have to go into the
     BIOS/UEFI settings to change the boot order. Again, search online for
     details about your specific computer model.

     For Apple computers with Intel processor press and hold the <kbd>⌥</kbd>
     (Option or Alt) key until you see the boot menu. On Apple silicon press
     and hold the power button.
     :::

     ::: {.note}

>      If your computer support both BIOS and UEFI boot, choose the UEFI option.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     If your computer supports both BIOS and UEFI boot, choose the UEFI option.
```

     :::

     ::: {.note}
     If you use a CD for the installation, the computer will probably boot from
     it automatically. If not, choose the option containing the word "CD" from
     the boot menu.
     :::

3.   Shortly after selecting the appropriate boot drive, you should be
     presented with a menu with different installer options. Leave the default
     and wait (or press <kbd>Enter</kbd> to speed up).

4.   The graphical images will start their corresponding desktop environment

>      and the graphical installer, which can take some time. The minimal images

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     and the graphical installer. The minimal images
```
It shouldn't really take long and be done in 30 seconds at most.

Author: When letting test people do the install, they where often impatient and thought they have to do something in the black screen before the desktop is shown... so i think this information is essential for people to patiently wait for the desktop to show up! (even if they might not read the manual)

Reviewer 5: Yeah, kde sometimes take a bit to show something. Especially when you are not used to boot from USB.

     will boot to a command line. You have to follow the instructions in
     [](#sec-installation-manual) there.

## Graphical Installation {#sec-installation-graphical}

The graphical installer is recommended for desktop users and will guide you
through the installation.

1.   In the "Welcome" screen, you can select the language of the Installer and
     the installed system.

     ::: {.tip}
     Leaving the language as "American English" will help to be able to copy
     and paste error messages in a search engine or issue report.
     :::

2.   Next you should choose your location to have the timezone set correctly.
     You can actually click on the map!

     ::: {.note}
     The installer will use an online service to guess your location based on
     your public IP address.
     :::

3.   Then you can select the keyboard layout. The default keyboard model should
     work well with most desktop keyboards. If you have a special keyboard or
     notebook, your model might be in the list. Select the language you are most
     comfortable typing in.

>      ::: {.tip}
>      There are special keyboard layouts that are optimized to be ergonomic like
>      [NEO](https://www.neo-layout.org/),
>      [Dvorak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dvorak_keyboard_layout) and
>      [Colemak](https://colemak.com/), in opposition to the classic QWERTY layout
>      which comes from typewriters and has not changed much since 1873.
>      You might want to check them out.
>      :::
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
I don't think we should promote that here. If a beginner chooses one of these and doesn't actually know what the consequences are then you cannot log in after a reboot.

Author: You are right. That information might not be useful and rather distracting here.

Should the mention of NEO in the existing documentation also be removed?

Reviewer 4: We can probably keep it if it is something interesting other distros lack.

> 4.   On the "Users" screen, you have to type in your name, login name and
>      password. You can also enable an option to automatically login to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4.   On the "Users" screen, you have to type a display name, login name and
     password. You can also enable an option to automatically login to the
```

     desktop.

5.   Then you have the option to choose a desktop environment. If you want to
     create a custom setup with a window manager, you can select "No desktop".

     ::: {.tip}
     If you don't have a favorite desktop and don't know which one to choose,
     you can stick to either GNOME or Plasma. They have a quite different
     design, so you should be able to choose which one you like better.
     They are both popular choices and well tested on NixOS.
     :::

> 6.   You have the option to allow unfree software in the next screen.

Reviewer 4: Does this include unfree firmware? If not we should likely add a short section for that, too.

Author: yes. there is a detailed description in the installer

![Screenshot from 2022-05-30 02-51-00](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/91113/170899056-3bd32229-4048-4ac1-b471-4ae340efe2c9.png)

(it does not enable unfree gpu drivers, but e.g. wifi drivers)

7.   The easiest option in the "Partitioning" screen is "Erase disk", which will
     delete all data from the selected disk and install the system on it.
     Also select "Swap (with Hibernation)" in the dropdown below it.
     You have the option to encrypt the whole disk with LUKS.

     ::: {.note}
     At the top left you see if the Installer was booted with BIOS or UEFI. If
     you know your system supports UEFI and it shows "BIOS", reboot with the
     correct option.
     :::

     ::: {.warning}
     Make sure you have selected the correct disk at the top and that no valuable

>      data is still on the disk!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     data is still on the disk! It will be deleted when formatting the disk.
```

     :::

8.   Check the choices you made in the "Summary" and click "Install".

     ::: {.note}

>      The install takes about 15 minutes. The time varies based on the selected
>      desktop, internet speed and disk write speed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     The installation process can take about 15 minutes. The time varies based on the selected
     desktop environment, internet connection speed and disk read/write speed.
```

Author: it can take 8 minutes, it can take 10 minutes and it can take also 14 minutes, from my tests. but i have high-end hardware (nvme SSD) and gigabit internet, so i have choosen a higher number. if it's even faster, the user will be happy, but when it takes longer than this estimate, they might be unhappy. it says "takes **about** 15 minutes", so it's clear that it is not an exact value

i don't mentioned USB flash drive read speed and processor / memory speed, as it is not that relevant (install is mostly from internet and not much from usb drive i think). the section does not have to get so long

     :::

9.  When the install is complete, reboot into your new system!

## Manual Installation {#sec-installation-manual}

NixOS can be installed on BIOS or UEFI systems. The procedure for a UEFI
installation is broadly the same as for a BIOS installation. The differences
are mentioned in the following steps.

The NixOS manual is available by running `nixos-help` in the command line
or from the application menu in the desktop environment.

To have access to the command line on the graphical images, open
Terminal (GNOME) or Konsole (Plasma) from the application menu.

You are logged-in automatically as `nixos`. The `nixos` user account has
an empty password so you can use `sudo` without a password:

```ShellSession
$ sudo -i
```

> You can use `loadkeys` to switch to your preferred keyboard layout.

Reviewer 4: Is there a difference to setxkbmap?

Reviewer: Yes.

`loadkeys` works on the kernel fbcon. `setxkbmap` works on X11.

Author: i have no idea. i have not changed the command, so maybe discuss that in a new issue

it does work, so i don't know if we should change it

`picocom -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0`). When the bootloader lists boot
entries, select the serial console boot entry.

> ### Networking in the installer {#sec-installation-manual-networking}
> 

Reviewer 6: Maybe also preserve the old anchor to keep external links working:

```suggestion
### Networking in the installer {#sec-installation-manual-networking}
[]{#sec-installation-booting-networking} <!-- legacy anchor -->

```

Author: I thought about that. Thanks for showing how to do it.
